Welcome to Slash Forward. We’re almost there,
people. We’re looking at Saw 3D, renamed Saw:
The Last Chapter even though it’s not. Hit the
like button if you’re ready to get to the traps,
and I’ll do so, right after I unpack the storyline
to see what we can learn. Let’s get to it.
We open, surprisingly, on Dr. Gordon,
wriggling his way along and finding a nice,
steamy pipe with which to cauterize his stump.
Before flashing to an unknown time and place
where the bustle of the big city is brought to
a standstill by a curious storefront display.
A couple of bros awake, attached to a saw
table, with their mutual lover dangling
betwixt. Some of the gawkers call the police,
and one of them bangs on the glass. Otherwise,
they don’t really do much. Billy the automaton
then pedals out to Brad and Brian and...Tina,
the ruiner of fine alliteration, letting them
know that the boys were played for simps,
manipulated to provide for Tina’s every whim.
So now they have sixty seconds to either
push the saws to one side or the other,
cutting up a slab of man meat, or leaving it
in the middle to bifurcate Tina. Tina tries to
charge Brad up with some encouraging words,
but Brian absolutely wrecks his Carhardts,
drawing first blood. But then he has
second thoughts and, after an apology,
the police run up just in time to see the
boys awash in the blood of their sacrifice.
We then circle back to the last
ending to watch Jill stagger off,
trying to avoid Hoffman who is out for blood.
He finds a nice, clean rag for his mangled hand,
but opts to let his face air out a bit.
He soon arrives at his private toolshed
to catch some news and sew himself up,
and the results are barely noticeable.
Then we go back to the station where Jill
is looking for help outside the FBI and
homicide department. For protection from
her various pursuers she enlists the help
of Gibson from Internal Affairs. She agrees
to give him some moisture rich evidence,
but only if he grants her full immunity,
as is the purview of the police force.
He’s a bit incredulous, until she drops the hot
stuff and he nearly explodes with anticipation.
Back at the toolshed, Hoffman makes like he never
existed as he prepares for the inevitable fallout.
Which may include Bobby Dagan, a Jigsaw survivor
who’s written a book about his experiences.
He explains to his expectant host how he had to
pierce his breasts in order to hoist himself to a
platform of salvation. Near death, he recognized
his was a life left unexamined and dug deep to
find the strength and courage to carry through.
He pretty much slaughtered this performance,
but his management team disagrees about whether
he was exploitative enough of his own trauma.
Elsewhere, Jill emerges into the evening fog
and finds a strange scene. It seems a bit too
set up and, as suspected, she gets grabbed
here. You see, he’s got this rocket sled,
and it would be terribly disappointing if he
had to run before using it. As it screams down
the track and quarters her helpless body, we
discover this to be a rare dream sequence.
In the junkyard district of town,
Evan wakes up in his project car,
which powers on its magical 8-track player. It
announces that he and his friends are racists and,
since they all follow his lead, it’s
time for him to lead them all to safety.
All he has to do is pull the lever before
him. The process of doing so should help him
to understand how we’re all made of the same
stuff on the inside. He makes a go of it and,
despite getting 3/4s of the way, he gasses
out, which results in a tremendous catastrophe.
Now that the story’s been properly
advanced, we meet back up with Bobby,
leading a survivor’s meeting with cameras in tow.
He attempts to help them cope, but is he licensed?
We don’t know. At any rate, if we’re
getting a bit tired of hearing him
talk about the goodness of suffering, we
have Simone joining the chat to call BS.
She insists there is no absolution through
pain, but Bobby rallies and insists they all
must search for the positive to derive
some meaning from their experiences.
This is mainly for the cameras,
and you know who’s not impressed?
Dr. Gordon. He leaves him with some choice
words. However, the final verdict? He crushed it,
again. And when he gets out to his car he
learns he’s going to be doing it all over.
Meanwhile, the cops have discovered the most
recent site, and call in Gibson to lend his
expertise as an IA administrator. The tape is
warped from the crash, so they’re left to wonder
why. But it appears possible this was
all to flex a little on old Gibson.
Bobby then wakes up inside a tumbler and learns
it is, again, game time. But actually not...again,
it is game time, but he lied about his previous
experience. So now he gets to learn a valuable
life lesson. He has sixty minutes to pass
some tests and save his wife. The cage is
then lifted above a spike platform with a
ring hanging above. With no instruction,
he immediately pulls the ring, which drops
out the bottom. He hangs on tight and donkey
kongs his way to safety while Joyce gets a
little preview of what’s to come on the CCTV.
He takes a moment to flash back to when he and
his bud were just a couple of washed out losers,
and a news story of a survivor’s travails
gave him the motivation he needed to kick off
his self-help empire. Then he heads to the only
unlocked door and follows the trail before him.
As we catch up with all our various characters,
we find that Jill is safe and sound in witness
protection, and that Gibson is so upset that
she’s still holding out on him about some key
details. She’s concerned about her safety
even here, at which Gibson scoffs. I mean,
it’s a safehouse, is it not? But then they get
a DVD delivered from Hoffman I know, right?
Gibson gets an update from Rogers, who has
to hang up when a bomb goes off at the yard.
So they focus their attention to the
DVD, which must’ve been copied off a
VHS judging by the tracking bars.
In order to stop the ongoing game,
they’ll have to turn over Jill. Instead,
Gibson orders her locked up in a holding cell.
When Bobby makes it to his next challenge,
he finds his associate strapped down with
some menacing pipes pointing at her. It seems
that this contraption was devised to help with
pulling loose teeth, but he plays the tape to be
sure. The key to her padlock is inside of her,
attached to a hook. If time runs out or she
screams too loud, the pipes will enter her.
Naturally, she immediately starts screaming. Nina
gets calm and gives Bobby permission to just go
for it. But honetly, that sucker is in there so
tight, they didn’t really need to have a time
limit imposed. Cause ya girl can’t help but to
scream. He does get it out with only a little bit
of her esophagus, but he misses the timer. After
he shouts out his dissatisfaction into her cold,
dead face, we see that failures cause Joyce
to get pulled a little closer to the floor.
In the next room, he finds a copy of his book
that he had previously signed for a teenaged
John Kramer. He gives him a little
guff about his lying ways, which is
really coming home to roost now, as the kids say.
Back at the precinct, Gibson recognizes
a lawn cherub from the video,
and then they’re alerted of some security
footage that shows them the abduction,
getting them one step closer to the edge.
In the next room Bobby finds his attorney
Suzanne pinned to a table. Before he can do much,
kool aid Billy smashes his way into the room. He
learns that she’s on a rotating table that’s set
to pierce her eyes and mouth unless he’s
able to lift a set of bars that closes
a circuit and slows her table. Ya boi manages
to press a full stack like an absolute madman,
and even while getting fully stabbed in the
ribs. But he’s untrained in static contractions,
causing him to continuously fail. A necessary
step for building mass, but only delaying the
inevitable as regards Suzanne’s face, making
her death, in a way, much, much worse.
Back at the station, Gibson asks Jill about Bobby,
but she claims to know nothing of him. When they
return, they’ve received a new video from Hoffman.
He drops a little riddle for his old pals, which
Gibson immediately picks up on, so they head out.
Bobby then advances again, but not
to Joyce. Cale is the next victim,
on the other side of a catwalk and
presently freaking the freak out
due to a head contraption that prevents him
from seeing. Bobby is to guide Cale across,
then meet him with the key before the winch
engages and cranks on his neck. They make
their way across and Cale nearly denies the winch
her prize. Bobby snags the key with ten seconds
to spare, but then tosses it to a blind man,
sealing his fate. So Bobby exits stage right.
Gibson and Rogers bust in to find the cherub.
This is the location where Hoffman saved Gibson
as a beat cop. Gibson got jammed up
and, while thankful for his life,
did not appreciate Hoffman’s disdain for
the citizenry. Gibson turned him in and
has been trying to put him away ever since.
The clue trail then points him at an old,
abandoned psychiatric hospital. He goes to check
that, and sends Rogers back to hover over Jill.
Meanwhile, Bobby gets to the final room, where
he can see and communicate with his baby.
He tries to reassure her before Billy cuts
in. The door before him has a four digit code,
and he has the numbers etched into his
molars. The next steps are obvious,
so he gets started as a police
tactical unit works to catch up.
He makes good time, wrenching out his bloody
chiclets. And halfway in, they track the video’s
source to the address of the junkyard. So Gibson
peels off to finish his unfinished business,
and is unable to share in Bobby’s
success as he gets the code and proceeds.
The team then pulls on a door that engages
a gas trap, taking them out of the equation.
While Gibson arrives at the junkyard and finds
a secret entrance through which he eventually,
presumably, finds Hoffman in his Jigsaw robes.
Back with Joyce, Bobby’s final test is
to earn her love by surviving the very
game he contrived for his book. He has
to pierce dem titties and hoist himself
up to connect some extension cords.
He comes clean about his deception,
and apologizes for lying as she admonishes
him, even though he’s doing the dang thing.
At that same time, we learn the man at
the chair is actually one of the corpses,
and that Hoffman’s had eyes on them the
whole time. Gibson puts together that,
while distracted by the explosion, Hoffman had
pulled the old switcheroo with the body so he
could get back into the station in the manner of
a true mastermind. Gibson tries to call Palmer
to have her order everyone back to the station,
but he and the boys get squibbed up while Hoffman
emerges and slathers his face wounds in fresh
blood as he kills his way to the holding cell.
When we circle back to Bobby he’s looking fit
and moist, and getting the job done. Luckily,
skin is very easy to puncture. Joyce professes
her love for him pursuant to this new sacrifice,
and he cranks his chain all the way
to the top. He basically makes it,
but finds he didn’t go deep enough and crashes
back to the floor. The timer then counts down
and Joyce is entombed in a brazen hog,
which lights up and roasts her alive.
Meanwhile, Hoffman lands a perfect eye shot
from the observation room. He walks in,
thinking he has the edge, not realizing
that she used her time to craft her first
shank. She sticks him and runs until she finds
a little spot to duck away in. Unfortunately,
Hoffman finds her and renders her unconscious.
He then dusts off the torture chair they keep
around and buckles her down. After
that, he hooks her up with a classic,
sets the timer and lets it ride - giving the fans
the payoff they’ve been waiting for? Who knows.
He then waltzes back to his toolshed
to continue escaping. But while he’s
walking away slowly from an explosion, he’s
pounced upon by the cult of John Kramer,
led by none other than Dr. Gordon. We find
he was indebted to Jigsaw for nursing him
back to health and caring tenderly for
his stump. He is then enlisted to employ
his surgical skills in the execution
of various traps that required it.
We learn that in exchange for his help, and
in acting on his behalf after his death,
John agreed to share with him the final secret -
the location of his old room that he was so fond
of. This is where he leaves Hoffman but,
unlike before, he offers no redemption.
This was the first film that feels distinctly
different from the rest of the series.
As we’re looking for bigger payoffs, things
are getting progressively more silly,
and I wonder if they’re drifting from the original
intent? Is this good or bad from a trap
perspective? Let’s take a look and see.
We’ll start, as the movie does, with the triple
saw situation. Here we have an opening trap to
set the tone. Incidentally, it’s not connected to
any of the other scenarios that unfold throughout
the movie, and comes across as contrived merely
for shock value. Tone set, let’s go. This trap
seems to be initiated by magic - what is the
timing on it, in terms of starting the motor and
rolling Billy out and the participants actually
waking up? This may seem nitpicky, but it’s highly
problematic, because if magic is involved, I’m
going to have to do a lot more research. The basic
gist here is the boys can either fight it out in
a reverse tug of war, pushing the saws to one side
or the other and obliterating their partner.
Or, they can leave them as-is and let Tina get
split into two medium-sized portions. They end up
with option B, although I’m not sure they had to.
It’s hard to tell what all is going on with these
quick cuts and close shots, but I think there are
at least two possible ways to beat this from the
inside. Obviously, if some of these bystanders
would have gotten off their ass and done
something, it may have been a very different
outcome. Yea, a 110 lb lady slapping the flat
side of her briefcase against the glass didn’t
break it, but are we to assume this structure
was purpose built? Is this bulletproof glass,
or just the window glass from a building that
already exists? Does the building have doors or
employees? Already we’re starting off with quite a
few absurdities just to bring this thing together.
But from inside, the fellas are harnessed to
the frame by their wrists and hips. Even so,
they seem to have a good deal of range of motion.
And, they don’t seem to have to move too terribly
far to get that center saw to start dropping
significantly. With their saws oriented upward,
it seems possible that they could cheat
far enough to one side or the other,
moving their bodies out of the way of the saw, to
create a safe environment for all three of them.
It can also be confirmed that these are gas
powered tools. The exhaust builds up over the
course of the trap, and some still shots reveal
that the exhaust ports are unprotected and right
on the side. One of the boys could likely put
their foot over the end of the exhaust, or even
rest their face across it or their mouth to choke
it out and stop it’s rotation. It would then be
safe to pull the contraption all the way over on
the side where the saw is no longer functioning.
Next is the junkyard set up. If you were
unfortunate to find yourself involved in
this trap, you’re probably going to wind up dead.
But, based on the recording, as long as you’re
not a racist that would be unlikely to happen.
This is another trap designed for death. Yea,
I think we may want to believe we would
have the inner strength to be able to do
what needs to be done, but this is a full
thickness degloving of Evan’s entire torso.
Absolutely brutal and, I’m going to say it,
probably not possible. I think it likely you
would go into shock before you ever got
far enough, even if it was possible to
separate this much skin from your back
slowly and through sheer force of will.
No, in this one, Hoffman needed this to go
down. It was integral to the overall plot,
and initiated all the key requirements of his
master plan. If this trap didn’t kill, none of
the rest of the movie would happen, which is why
it’s such a ridiculously impossible scenario.
Just glancing it over, I do wonder if your skin
would actually give way before the upholstery.
If you don’t want to test it, perhaps there is
a sharp enough object lying around nearby that
would allow you to cut it away enough to be able
to lean toward the lever? This then leads me to
acknowledge the importance of always carrying
a knife on you, a vital survival tool in all
situations. But then it seems likely you would
be stripped of useful tools before being put
into the setup, which naturally leads to
the rule amendment that you should always
keyster a knife so you have access to a useful
and vital tool in all survival situations. So,
the newest rule would be to always have a
knife, ensured by storing it up your butt.
Moving on to Bobby now, as he
dominates the remainder of the
traps through this movie. Just to set
the stage, he is inside a very much
uncleared area with sixty minutes to
make his way through the various rooms,
saving his cohorts along the way, until he
eventually gets the chance to save his wife.
He starts out inside a cylindrical cage
that hangs above some spikes. This one has
no instructions and no broader message. It’s
sort of a light warmup for what’s to come,
and represents more of a physical challenge
than what we normally see. He also escaped
it with no problem, so it doesn’t warrant much
analysis. Realistically, if you were attempting
to release yourself, it would behoove you to
start by getting your feet wedged into those
squares to maintain a solid base. Also, the
swinging and jumping aspect would be easier
from the very bottom of the cage rather than
several rungs up, but these are minor quibbles.
This brings him to fishhook Nina,
restrained in a straightjacket
and tied down in the center of this
contraption. First step here is to
ignore the key. The fact that there’s sound
control on this device makes it impossible,
and there’s enough blood coming out here that
she’s unlikely to survive anyway. She would
probably end up suffocating from the pressure of
the blood pooling up around her internal organs.
You’d want to focus on trying to stop the
machine to give more time to disassemble
it and get her out. As an initial point, the
timer device has an on/off switch contained
directly on its face. That would be a first
step. From there, it might be worthwhile to
find something you could use for leverage,
possibly from the prior area, and see if you
could pry against the frame of the machine to get
the gears to gap just enough so they can’t grip.
If this process is a bit too noisy, risking the
victim’s throat, this device has a variety of
exposed wiring you could tug on to various
effect. The SPL meter is fully exposed.
The cord coming out of the lockbox is similarly
exposed. Once you’ve taken care of that aspect,
you could keep working on pulling things apart. I
see no reason why you wouldn’t be able to wrench
this padlock off the box or its little metal
strap. With the presence of so many cans along
the wall here, I also wonder about the presence
of a can opener somewhere. It seems like this
could be helpful in regards to cutting wires,
if needed. So really, there are a lot of options
with this one, you just have to look beyond
the person and become one with the machine.
This brings us to Suzanne’s table. I would’ve
liked to have come into this room to find
Suzanne partially free. She really had a lot of
arm freedom here, and I feel it was squandered
somewhat by her. But that’s a secondary concern
as there are several, simple options elsewhere.
Her table is motivated by a simple gear and chain
system. These types of chains are adjustable in
length, and will typically have a connecting
link that allows you to shorten or lengthen
it before closing it off again. Pulling this link
out of the chain would completely negate the trap.
There are also a couple of options at the actual
machine, which was not well thought out. First,
the expectation is that he will press
the weight upward. But, in so doing,
it enters his ribcage from the side. How is he
supposed to press up while this thing is going
in from the side? This complication is ultimately
negated, however, in how the system works.
By pressing up to the top, he touches
two bars that then close a circuit,
slowing the table. If he slows it to
the end of the timer, she will survive.
Atop this contraption are some clearly visible
exposed wires. It seems possible to pull these
wires and attach them in the middle. Barring that,
you could also put any of a variety of random,
conductive objects between these two connection
points in order to close the circuit without
having to move the bar at all or very much. In
particular, there were some warmers or coolers
or something near the kitchen that had some metal
wire racks in them that could be propped up here.
From here we find ourselves at another
challenge that rewards physicality,
Cale’s winch-noose. This challenge seems a bit
stretched. The odds of guiding Cale blindly across
these boards is so small, and it takes so much
time to talk to him, the best odds would really
be for him to stay put and for Bobby to just come
all the way over. Realistically, this is doable
with a bit of agility and some calculated risks.
For instance, Bobby tossed him the key at the end
rather than hopping over to him. But why not hop?
He did it once before, and there had to be some
way for Cale to get to where he was so they could
exit the door at the end? This trap really puts a
lot of emphasis on the downward dangers when it’s
really upward that’s the problem. Cale is going to
get hung if you don’t get across quickly enough,
and the drop is just one floor. You would have to
fall from higher than four floors to ensure death.
So, as uncomfortable as it may be, you’re really
weighing the risk of minor to moderate injury
over someone else completely dying. Here I will
have to also invoke the technique previously
established by Hoffman of pulling down hard to
get out of a head harness. Cale is likely familiar
with this style of device as it seems the sort of
thing he would have at home, and if he could get
vision, everything would run a lot more smoothly.
The final two challenges are fairly
straightforward and, since they were
designed with the intent of wrapping up the
final plot points of the movie, there isn’t
a lot of detail available for them. The first
involves a simple code lock to open a door,
and the code is imprinted on Bobby’s teeth. He
did pass this one. And, with such limited time
and resources available, the option he went
with isn’t necessarily a bad one. It’s not
clear exactly how this mechanism is set up, but
these types of devices are typically very simple.
There are a couple of wires intended to provide
power to the keypad, and then a couple of wires
that communicate the signal as to whether the
circuit is open or closed in order to engage or
disengage the locking mechanism. Would it have
been possible to bridge them and open the door?
Perhaps, there are wires sticking out on the
front here. But at this point you’d be tired
and emotionally exhausted. A little pain
might actually perk you back up and give
you the drive you need to see this thing through.
Especially on the heels of so, so many failures.
Which finally brings us to dear, innocent
Joyce, who paid a tremendous price for the
transgressions of her husband. Bobby is to hoist
himself up to plug in an extension cord via a
simple chain and pulley device with two hooks
on it. It seems the primary thing slowing him
down was the pain of piercing his pecs and pulling
himself up by his flesh. So, don’t use your flesh,
bro. Put your belt at approximately
nipple height and latch onto that. Or,
leave it on your waist. Or, if you don’t have
a belt on, use the top part of your pants,
which can also be rolled over a few
times to enlist the help of more fabric,
increasing the tensile strength and improving
the odds of getting yourself up there.
All in all, this whole funhouse of challenges
would be an easy one to make it through.
You could really fail as much as
you’d like, and still get to the end,
which would then just require you
to pull a couple wisdom teeth,
which you were going to have done anyway,
and then you’re golden. You’ve got this.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you can
support the channel through donations or
merch. Any donation unlocks uncensored movie
reviews of Lifeforce and Under the Skin,
with others to be added over
time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.